>> Kyle Simpson: Let's jump into our
course on Functional Light JavaScript.
I wanna explain just a moment,
the title and then I'm gonna
spend a little bit of time motivating
this topic of functional programming.
Because there's probably different
reasons why you showed up or
why you're taking this particular course.
And I wanna talk about what my motivation
is for teaching it, my approach.
But just the title itself, I wanna make
sure that we address this for a moment.
So, first off this is a refresh of
a course on Frontend Masters
by the same name.
The very first time I ever taught
the topic was for Frontend Masters and
I gave this course before.
So it was the very first
path I ever made at it.
And now we're a year and
a half or so later,
I've written a full book on the topic,
I've been learning a lot more about it.
And so I've come back to refresh this
topic, give a fresh set of eyes to it.
In some ways, it's some of the same stuff
that we talked about but in other ways,
there are very different ways that
I think about it and therefore,
teach and share with others.
I thought about calling the course
functional lighter JS since we're updating
it but that [LAUGH] sort of
implies that we're getting less.
So I will calling it the same
thing Functional Light.
But speaking of that name, what do I
mean by functional light, what is that?
You might be of the impression that
the word light is intended to imply
intro, or beginner, or easy path in.
And I wanna change that particular notion.
This is rigorous material and especially,
if you read the book functional
programming is not for the light of heart.
But [COUGH] it does not have to be a cliff
that somebody just throws you up against
and you keep banging your face up against.
That's what I had done for nearly
a decade of trying to learn this topic.
Some of you may have been like me,
at one point or
another you heard this term
functional programming.
The very first time I heard that
term I thought, well that's cool.
I use functions in my program,
I'm already doing functional programming.
And then it was years of realizing,
no, I wasn't doing functional
programming at all.
I didn't even understand in a real
true sense what a function was.
And we're gonna spend a bunch
of time even really trying to
figure out what a function is and
what the characteristics are that you
might not have actually thought of.
Cuz it really does start with that.
As a matter of fact when I started
writing my book, the very first chapter,
the literally the first sentence
[LAUGH] of the first chapter.
I made this statement and then I pushed
it up to GitHub because I write and
push things up as quickly as
I've written them or whatever.
So I pushed up the first paragraph or
two of this book.
And the very first sentence said
functional programming is not all about
the function.
And I knew I was doing something right
because the functional programming police
came out of nowhere, I have no idea that
they even knew that I was writing a book.
They came, descended upon me and told me,
this is horrible why would you say such
a thing, functional programming
is all about the function.
And they hadn't even given me an
opportunity to explain the context of what
I meant there.
What I was really saying is functional
programming is not all about
the function keyword.
So I clarified that to make [LAUGH]
sure they wouldn't be so upset.
It's not all about the function keyword.
It is however, all about the function and
about modeling,
our applications in such a way
that functions play a pivotal role in how
data transfers through the application.
And that will change the way you
approach organizing your code.
It should change it because
if it's not changing it,
then what are you wasting your time on?
It should change it and
it should try to improve.
I'm gonna use terms like better and
improve and
we're gonna have to know
even what that means.
So I wanna get even into
that before we go forward.
I wanna make sure we're
all on the same page here.
[COUGH] So Functional Light is
not some intro easy beginner but
what it is is like showing
up at the face of a cliff.
And instead of having to figure out how
to use the rock climbing equipment,
there's somebody there to show
you how the equipment works.
You still have to climb the cliff wall but
instead of figuring out the equipment
yourself, you now have some instruction
on how to get up the cliff.
That's the proper way to approach this.
It will be difficult.
As a matter of fact, and
we mentioned before that I have this book
that's where you can find
it on GitHub [COUGH].
I'm trying to be very unassuming about
this because my description there,
I'm just talking about
functional programming.
I'm not really a functional programmer, so
I'm not even qualified to write about it
which is why I gave it this name,
Functional Light.
Because I wanted to distinguish
that my approach is bottom up
rather than top down.
Most approaches to functional
programming start with, okay,
let's all learn about category theory and
types and all of this notation.
And then from there we can learn this and
learn that, it's a top down approach.
Now I took computer science and
I still get lost in all of
that notation and terminology.
Time, and time, and
time again I go to a conference and
I'd say, this is the time I'm gonna
sit in the functional talk and
this is the time I'm
gonna learn something.
And to be honest with you
there was this one guy
at every conference that I did actually
learn a little bit from, Bryan Lonsdorf.
He's kind of my personal hero,
especially on this topic.
He has taught a much deeper and
more authoritative course on functional
programming here on this platform.
He also has written about it:
Professor Frisbee's Mostly Adequate Guide.
He has been the beacon that has helped
me figure out anything that I've known.
But I would understand the first
five minutes of Brian's talk, and
then I was completely lost.
So I'd be furiously trying to take
notes and about five or six minutes in,
I give up.
Cuz he's using terminology like when
you say something like a monad is
just a monoid in the category
of endofunctors.
If you already know what those words mean,
that is a very precise and
crisp way to communicate a set of ideas.
So I don't mean ti make fun of those words
or the idea that those words matter,
they absolutely do.
But that's throwing a bunch of
equipment at me and saying,
figure out how to use that equipment.
And even if I could figure
out how to climb it,
I probably wouldn't be doing it safely.
So I think we needed a different
way to start at this topic and
that's what Functional Light is about,
it's this bottom up pragmatic approach.
We're uncovering the core principles or
at least the things I think are core
principles to functional programmers.
But we're uncovering them
from a more intuitive and
less top down notation
terminology heavy way.
So, why functional programming?
What is the motivation here, what is
it that we're trying to improve and
what does it even mean to improve?
I wanna frame that discussion about
functional programming around the debate
or the contrast between imperative and
declarative.
I don't know how many people listening in
will know exactly what I mean by that, so
I wanna be very clear, what we mean
by imperative versus declarative.
Imperative code is code that focuses
on how to accomplish a task.
As a matter of fact,
if we go all the way back to
the beginning of programming computers.
When it was done by one's and zero's on
punch cards, that is the most imperative.
We're literally telling it switch this bit
from one to zero and that sorta thing.
We're literally telling it
exactly how to do its job.
It's not interpreting anything,
it's just doing what we told it to do.
That's the perfect most pure
example of imperative code.
As soon as we started adding programming
languages on top of the ones and zeros.
Assembly language being one of
the first representations of that.
As soon as we did that, we started to
create some abstraction where we were
writing in a language that
was more friendly to humans.
And it was being interpreted into
a language that the computer understood,
the one's and the zero's.
So it's slightly less imperative but
still highly imperative.
Assembly language, if you've ever seen it.
It's like move this piece of data into
this register and then move this here.
I mean it's very, very imperative.
And then we invented more programming
languages on top of that.
And within each of those tiers of
programming language generations we added
frameworks, and libraries, and patterns,
and DSLs, and other things like that.
To abstract the way more,
the instructions that we wanna give to
the computer from what actually happens.
So, even the code that you write, even
when you write a for loop in JavaScript,
it's not nearly as imperative as it
would had you been writing the one's and
zero's of the assembly [INAUDIBLE].
It is more declarative, so
this is not a binary, something is
either imperative or it is declarative.
Or rather a continuum,
we've moving more towards the declarative,
as we have been adding more to program.
As we've been advancing the art
of performing language design and
framework design, DSLs and things of
that nature, we've been moving more and
more towards that.
And you see some chiming
examples of that [COUGH].
One of the most common,
that people will know these days,
angulars, touted as
a declarative framework of sorts
because you declare in your mark
up what you want to have happened.
And angular figures out
how to make it happen.
So if imperative is focusing on
how to make something happen.
Declarative is focusing on what
should happen and not how.
That's the contrast.
Now why does this matter?
It matters because most of the
advancements that we've made along this
continuum to be more declarative,
most of those advancements are there.
Because it's easier to read and understand
declarative code then it is to read and
understand imperative code.
As a matter of fact, we could sort of say
the computer is better at the imperative
part and we're better at
the cognitive declarative part.
That's what we're good at.
So we've been, in a sense,
improving the interface between us and
the computer, so that we can say
what we want to have happen.
And the computer can figure out the best
way to make that happen, the best how.
There is no truly completely declarative,
either just like the one's and zero's at
one end, we're not doing that anymore.
We're not doing fully declarative coding
like on Star Trek where you just talk to
the computer and you're like, analyze.
And the computer just figures out what
you meant by that, we're not doing that.
And I don't know that we ever will.
So, we'll always be
somewhere on the spectrum.
And each given piece of code needs to
be at different places on the spectrum.
Each different place in the code we
have to decide, is it better for
me to focus on more precisely instructing
the computer, or is it better for
me to focus on expressing my ideas?
But as a general rule, the more
declarative we are the more we focus on
expressing the what instead of the how.
The easier it is for
somebody to come along to read later.
And I wanna talk about this easier and
better thing but
I wanna caution you about an effect.
This is not unique to me but
I'm applying it to this particular domain.
I wanna caution you about an effect
that will happen as you start to move
from imperative to declarative using
techniques that we learn here.
And using the stuff that you learn
beyond this class in the book and
in other people's books.
I wanna caution you on this
perception of readability problem.
So as we move along the x axis
from imperative to declarative,
we start out at the beginning with
a certain moderate level of readability.
We feel like, I can mostly understand
what I'm doing with the code.
And you'll notice that is,
as we move along the curve,
we begin to see some improvement in
the readability of the code rather early.
And we're feeling really
good about ourselves.
We're like, wow.
I'm really using some of this
functional stuff.
And I'm being more declarative and
it's starting to make more sense.
And then somewhere along the way,
we begin to press that curve.
And we begin to bring more of these
ideas in and all of a sudden,
we're bringing ideas in that are
transforming our code in such pronounced
ways that when we take a fresh look at it
or when somebody else looks at our code.
They're like, what are you doing there?
And it can actually really start to
go down hill and you start to get to
the point where you can't even understand
what your code is doing anymore, and
you're like, why I'm I even doing this?
And it's at that moment, I have found and
not only from myself but
others that many people bail and
say, this is not working for me.
Sometimes we blame ourselves,
sometimes we blame the tool.
We say functional programming is just
poorly designed, it's too opaque,
it's too thick with all of this stuff for
me to possibly get there.
And I would say that I have
gone all the way down into that
trough and
begun to come out the other side.
And I can tell you that the mountain climb
is worth it when you make
it through that valley.
But I cannot promise you that
that is an easy path to take.
I don't have some easy path that gets you
there without going through that trough.
I wish I did, I'd probably
revolutionize this space if there
was some magic way to just make it so
that you never have to struggle with that.
But what I'm trying to do is encourage
you that that climb is worth it,
that that journey,
that that path is worth it.
And not to give up.
And not to get lost in
the disillusionment that can often occur.
Now, that's not to discourage you because
what we're gonna focus on today is that
first part of the curve.
In this course, we're gonna focus
on the first part of the curve and
trying to get those early winds
from the most intuitive and
pragmatic things that we
can improve about our code.
But I don't want you to think that that
is where your journey ought to stop
because I don't think it's
where it ought to stop.
And I don't think that you should never
aspire to be a functional programmer.
What I hope is that Functional Light
is your tutorial on how to
use the climbing tools.
And once you graduate from
Functional Light and you've read the book.
And you feel very confident about that,
your next mountain to climb
is the real climb of real
functional programming.
So this is your path onto
the mountain if you will.